Hello.
What is going on, everyone?
Welcome back to this amazing course in this chapter will take an in-depth look at how we can test a
block built application.
Why is everyone so afraid of testing?
What are the pros and cons and why is it so important to test every feature of your app?
We'll discuss it all today.
So why do developers hate testing so much?
Well, the answer I'm always receiving is so simple.
We hate testing because the application works fine without it.
It seems like a reasonable answer, right?
And indeed it is.
An application can work perfectly fine without testing, but that doesn't mean we should consider it
so badly.
Testing is in so many cases, a lifesaver.
It's the hero nobody talks about on the news.
So if you hate testing that much, think of it as a cute little duck which will be loyal to you and
your application all the time.
Think of it as a layer of security, a layer which will bark whenever something breaks inside your app.
Now, let me ask you something.
Have you ever worked on a big project in which you wanted to add a new feature and you realized that
after two or even three days of work, despite the fact that the feature works perfectly fine, it breaks
other features in a completely different place inside your app?
Or maybe have you thought if you ever want to delete a piece of code from within Europe, will this
action be destructive or not destructive to the app itself?
How would you check if everything is okay afterwards?
Most of you will say that they will run the app and check every feature to see if everything works well.
But I'm sure that some of you won't even physically test it and leave with the idea that nothing will
break a conclusion which is fundamentally wrong.
Code is code and code will break.
Keep that in mind.
So what if I tell you that there is something which will run a full check up of every feature you wrote
inside your app so that whenever you refactor your code, you'll be stress free without having to worry
about if it's going to crash or not?
You may have already guessed that.
I'm talking about our body testing.
Now, the difference between the pros and cons becomes rather a problem of deciding whether it's worth
choosing testing for its advantages over its disadvantages.
So obviously we know that the disadvantages of writing tests are that in the first place, we need to
learn and understand the structure of them and in the second place that it will obviously take more
time to implement and write all the necessary code.
But is it worth it?
I'll let you answer this question in the following minutes after we understand the structure and practice
testing on our beloved calendar app.
So testing, how could we implement a test for a feature?
Think of it logically.
How would you test if something is working or not?
In big words, a test is defined by how you will programmatically tell Flutter to double check if the
output given by a feature is equal to the expected response, you plan on receiving a no order.
Now let's switch to the coding part, where I'll show you how testing works and afterwards how to write
tests inside your app.
So in order to follow up, you can clone my Block Concepts Counter Project from GitHub because we'll
start coding from the link to that is into description.
The first thing you should do after you open up the project inside the code is to go and open up the
pub spec that YAML file.
We already have the flutter underscore a block dependency inside, but for testing purposes we also
need to add both the test and block underline test dependencies to the record.
Now, inside our project, we need to create a separate test folder in which we'll have all our test
files.
A little hint I can give you that every feature of your application needs to be tested in the first
place.
So the test inside the test folder should be kind of symmetrical to the features from within your app.
So all we have to do is to create the folder symmetrical to the folder inside the test folder and add
the underscore test to the name of the file.
In this case will have a counter underscore Cubitt underscore test that dirt file in which will test
out the functionality of our counter feature.
We remember from a couple of years back that all the counterfeiter does is to increment or document
a counter value based on which button is pressed by the user.
So inside the test file, we need to start by creating a main function inside.
This main function will go right ahead and create a group with the name of culture Cubitt.
A group is actually a way of organising multiple tests for a feature.
So, for example, inside our counter Cubitt group will write all the necessary.
As for the counter feature in a group, you can also share a common set up and tear down function across
all the available tests.
But what is the purpose of these functions?
Inside a set up function?
You can instantiate, for example, the objects our test will be working with.
In our case, we will instantiate the counter block so that we can access it later on in our tests.
So set up is merely as its name is implying a function which will be called to create and initialize
the necessary data.
This will work with.
On the other hand, the teardown down function is a function that will get called after each test is
run.
And if it's called within a group, it will apply, of course, only to the test in that group.
Inside of these, perhaps we can close the created Cubitt.
Now the time has finally come for us to write our first test, which is going to be checking if the
initial state of our culture Cubitt is equal to the counter state with a counter value of zero.
We're going to do this by creating a test function and give it a description which would denote the
purpose of it in this case is going to be the initial state is counter state with a counter value of
zero.
So how do we check this?
Well, I told you earlier that the purpose of any test is to double check that the output of the feature
is actually equal to the expected output and nothing else to do this.
All we need is the except function, which will take two main important arguments, the actual value
returned by our initial state and the expected value which we're expecting to be received.
So our initial state returned when the cubit is created, will be counted covid that state and the expected
value should be a counter state which has the counter value equal to zero.
We can run this test by typing the pub run test command into the castle or rather by clicking the run
button next to the group.
So if we run this test, we will surprisingly receive a complete failure with this message in which
we expected an instance of counter state and we actually receive an instance of counter state here.
You can actually start to understand why testing is such an amazing tool.
It has already signaled us a problem with our staff.
Remember that the application worked perfectly when we manually tested it.
How come that this test fails that?
Well, since it tells us that both the expected and actual outputs are an instance of counter state
and we know that both should have a zero value inside.
That means that the instances are still different somehow.
And that's due to the fact that inside dart language, two instances of the same exact class are equal,
even though they are basically identical.
This is happening because these two instances are stored in a different part of the memory, and DART
compares their location in memory instead of their values, hence making them not equal.
You can override this behavior really simple by using a really popular library you may have already
heard about Equatable in the back.
Equatable is just a simple tool which overrides the equal operator and the hash code for every class
that extends it has tricking darte into comparing the instances by value rather than by where they're
placed in the memory.
So if you want the functionality of comparing to instances like we do in our test, equatable is the
way to go.
OK, so all we need to do inside our app right now is to add the equatable dependency into the pub spec
that YAML file and then extend the counter state class with it.
Know that now will get the warning telling us that we need to override the props of the equatable class.
The props are just a way of indicating equatable, which are the fields in our class that we want to
be compared while applying the equal operator.
So we're going to pass both the counter value and there was incremented attribute inside the props list.
And now whenever we will compare to counter states, DART will compare them attributes by attributes
in order to see whether they're equal or not.
So right now, if you go back to our test file and run the test, the test should finally pass since
our expected an actual counter state had the same counter value, which is zero.
Now it is time for us to test out the functionality of the increment and.
And functions from inside our counter feature, because these are the most important right for this,
will use the block test function from inside the block, underscore test dependency will use this because
we need to test the output as a response to the increment or decrement functions will start with the
test for the increment functionality.
So firstly, we to describe it properly, the cubitt should emit a counter state with a counter value
of one and there was increment in value of two when cubitt that increment function is called.
To do this will use the trial parameters of build, act and expect from inside block test function.
The build parameter is a function that will return the current instance of the counter cubitt in order
to make it available to the testing process.
The ACT parameter is a function that will take the cubitt and will return the action applied on it,
which in our case is the increment function.
The expected parameter is an iterable list which will verify if the order of the state and the actual
admitted state correspond with the image it wants and no other sees the counteractive it emits only
a single state.
In this example, we will place it inside the least list accordingly.
The same procedure applies also to the Degremont function.
The only difference being that will act by calling the Degremont function and that will expect a counter
state with a counter value of minus one instead of one.
Since we subtract one from the initial counter value, let's run all the test and as you can see everything.
And then we can know for sure that the counter cubitt works as it should think about the scenario,
for example.
Now, so let's say you were moved away from this project and another guy comes into place to continue
the development.
He doesn't know dart that well and he thinks that the equatable package is not needed and that the application
can work just fine without it.
So he reflectors the code Rosia and indeed the app is still working perfectly.
But underneath, if we run the counter QB test, we can see that if there would be a part inside our
app comparing two identical states, the output would have been completely different.
This is exactly why AB testing should not be skipped.
It may seem like the refactoring works fine, but in reality it isn't.
So I guess now you understood why it's worth spending the extra time writing tests for your application.
The next chapter will dive into more advanced flutter block topics like block access and routing.
There are multiple ways of navigating between different screens in flutter.
Therefore, there are also multiple ways of providing and accessing blocks or qubits between those pages.
This chapter is going to be the longest chapter from Discoursed, so you might want to clear your mind
and grab some popcorn before.
With that being said, I am looking forward to seeing each and every one of you in the next chapter.
Stay tuned and let's get wicked.